Mainnet-Main network that is actually deploying on Blockchain network.
Its id is 1.
Used for actual txns with values.

Example-Ethereum Mainnet

etherscan

Testnet-Test Network is when  you deploy for testing purpose.No actual money is required here.
Every testnet has own id.
Used for testing smart contracts and dapps.

Example-Sepolia/Goerli

goerli.etherscan


How to Deploy on Test Network:-


We need a Wallet to Deploy our smart contract because you are occupying some space on the blockchain and then with wallet you are actually signing the contract 
that you own it and deploying on blockchain.
If you are just reading from blockchain wallet not required but if you writing on Blockchain you require a wallet.
You have the keys setup in your Wallet to sign the contract.
We will use Metamask Wallet for same.
You have to install it from metamask.io

Go to Metamask.io-Get Metamask-Install Metamask for chrome-Add to Chrome-add extension
Metamask will get installed and then it will ask to set password and after that will ask for secure your wallet-secret recovery phase which is just like private key in case you forget 
your password to login in your metamask wallet.Generate and copy it and use it next screen and done and metamask account created.
Now you can see your external own account with Mainnet ethereum selected.
Click on it and toggle on the Show Test Networks
Now u want to select Goerli Test Network which is not seen anymore.(in this RPC url and network id u have to keep as it is and others u can keep anything)
So select Sepolia.
You can see some accounts with 0 balance but you create 1 account and name it anything by clicking on Add account or hardware wallet.
Now to add some funds go to https://www.alchemy.com/faucets/ethereum-sepolia or search on google-Ethereum Sepolia Faucet
signup on alchemy using gmail.
Now the send eth button gets activated and copy paste ur account from metamask here and clcik on send eth and after some time it will credit to your account.

Now go to Remix ide on ur code:-

Go to left pane -Deploy tab-Enviroment dropdown-Injected provider metamask-once u click u will see ur metamask is connected to this enviroment after giving metamask creds.
You will see your sepolia details here and account that you connected with after clicking on connect below your account in metamask.
Now when u click on deploy button smart contract will get deployed on Sepolia test network.
Here metamask opens and u have to confirm the transfer of funds as you need to send some ether to deploy ur smart contract on blockchain network as u will occupy space there.
You can see in remix ide botton view etherscan status of transaction.
Once confirmed u can see from account and contract address.
You can click on various functions from remix ide and in particapate function which requires some money or ether then metamask window opens when u click on it unlike other functions where its just read values.
You can change 10 wei from 1 ether as u have low balance.


What is a testnet Ethereum faucet?
An Ethereum faucet is a developer tool to get testnet Ether (ETH) in order to test and troubleshoot your decentralized application or protocol before going live on Ethereum mainnet, 
where one must use real Ether. 
Most faucets require social authentication (e.g. Twitter post or login confirming you are a real human) or place you in a queue to wait for a testnet token through the faucet. 
The Alchemy Sepolia faucet is free, fast, and does not require authentication, though you can optionally login to Alchemy to get an increased drip.










